---
layout: single
title: "Mindfulness practice journal - 1 - The *soft* treatment of my meditation addiction"
date: 2026-02-01
categories: life
---

I used to practice [Goenka style vipassana meditation](https://www.dhamma.org). Briefly, the practice emphasizes detailed body scan to reveal subtle bodily sensations that go unnoticed during daily life. By being aware and equanimous of these sensations (can be pleasant or unpleasant), the practitioner re-condition the mind, removing the habit of craving and aversion that ultimately cause all the sufferings. This approach has given me incredible understanding of both myself and how the mind works in general. And pragmatically, it helped me go through stressful deadlines with complete calmness and full concentration. However, the premise was: after a ten-day silent retreat and continuing to practice for two hours every day. Over the years, with various logistics and health reasons, I stopped practicing the sits as consistently and noticed all the old mental habits (worry, comparison, distraction, etc.) coming back. I kept telling myself that "if only I could go back to the two-hour-a-day routine, my problems would be solved."

Recently, through a series of exposures from multiple friends and books (in Chinese and Buddhist context we might call it 缘, "destined affinity"), I came into contact with some critique of the Goenka style: 1) It's emphasis on sitting makes it hard to generalize to other daily contexts where awareness and equanimity are actually needed ("over-fitting" in the machine learning sense!). 2) The type of awareness is too narrow and forceful. Since the object of attention is only on the bodily sensations, and the instruction emphasizes noticing subtler and subtler sensations, it very easily leads practitioners to try hard to "concentrate", which has the danger of exhausting oneself and even producing greater craving. 

The alternative aproach is the "**soft awareness**" style (many teachings here by [Tejaniya](https://ashintejaniya.org/teachings)): the key now is not just to be aware of subtler and subtle sensations and remain equanimous, but to be aware of *anything*: sensory perceptions (vision, audition, smell, taste, touch), thoughts, mental attitudes (liking, disliking, neutral), emotional state (happy, sad, fearful, angry, hateful, envious, greedy etc), intention/impulse (very fast planning of the next step, reminding me of the "jumping / sweeping ahead" of the hippocampal population representation in spatial navigation), attitude (relaxed, tense, judgmental, curious, impateint etc.) , awareness state (present vs distracted). (Disclaimer: Buddhism has its own piles of lists. This is a non-rigorous list from my introspection, inspired by the Buddhist lists) A concrete starting point is to be aware that one is walking when one is walking, how one is walking, etc, and likewise for sitting, standing and lying. In these processes, one can additionally incoporate a continuous awareness of all the aforementioned elements from the experience, with the crucial awareness of the arising and passing away of all experiences (impermanence). The other crucial thing is that one should not be too tense or judgmental in this process. Do not try to be aware of everything, or blame oneself for mind-wandering. *Newton's third law holds even in the mental word: force always incur a counter-force.* During my discussion with my friend this point came up in both of our experiences, that trying to be too concentrated for some period always leads to a backlash of indulgence in mindless activiites like phone scrolling. So the way is to simply be aware that one was not mindful just now, and move on. 

So I started this new way. I started to **see** what's in front of me as I'm doing the dishes, **feel** the running water and the dishes, and **listen** to the sounds, and **know** I was standing, doing the dishes. Previously when I was not consciously trying, my mind always flew away when I did tasks like this. I thought the mind-wandering while doing chores was "relaxing", however, in retrospect, I rememebered it's simply adding fuels to the fire when I was already in a stressful state. Because the only thing that came to the mind was worry about the future and the tasks that needed to be finished. And the act of "adding fuel" can be sneaky. We tend to mistake such thinking as useful planning and efficient multi-tasking, however, being fully engaged in the current chore puts the mind back to a balanced state, like a mirror. Then a sudden intrusive thought reveals its identity as the friend of anxiety rather than a helfpul ally for problem solving, since the quality of the thought becomes so clear in contrast to the mirror state. 

This idea was not new to me. In fact I often had this realization during meditation retreats, or when I consistently do the sitting meditation. What's novel to me was that even without prolonged sitting, this method already allowed me to see things more clearly in my daily life. With this opening up of my awareness, I also started to notice more aspects of experience that I did not pay attention to before, because my mind was habituated to heavily focus on the sensations. For instance, it took me a while to notice I was smelling my fart, after I already went on a fast chain of mental reactions including: "gross" - "my digestion is bad" - "how to fix my digestion." This chain seems innocuous, but it is all these little unnoticed chains that gets entangled into knots that become counter-productive (for instance my obsession with health and how that can make me fixated and unhappy sometimes). I also noticed how my hands were moving by themselves, in perfectly predictable patterns, almost like little robots not under my control, when I washed my face. That moment of distance from my own body gave me another viseral experience of the "autopilot".

I came to a deeper realization of my previous attachment to meditation (I already conceptually knew it, but conceptual knowledge is never enough). I made my happiness and inner peace contingent upon this particular form of practice, instead of the more general Buddhist philosophy against an independent, unchanging and powerful essence in anything (the different aspects of this core idea can be called "impermanence", "non-self", "emptiness", etc.). This "soft" approach serves like an antidote to the "meditation addiction". The purpose of the body scan in the Goenka-style Vipassana meditation is to break down the coarse sensations to realize it's composed of subtler and subtler sensations, each constantly arising and passing away, thereby **feeling** the truth of impermanence. This "breaking down into subtler sensation" is fascillitated by the stillness in sitting meditation. However, in real life we can't be scanning all the time. The "soft" approach makes me realize I don't need to see me as the vibrating sensations in order to train my perception of impermanence. In fact **every** experience has the quality of arising and passing away. Even when we feel stuck in negative emotion, that will go away at some point. But without an awareness observing this process with equanimity and a little kindness, the emotional mind could *feel as if* the emotion will last forever. With the awareness paying attention closely to the arising and passing away of experience, the natural flow of mental states becomes less obstructed. In this sense, Buddhism and Daoism are similar in that whatever obstructs the natural flow of the mind (e.g. sticky feeling, inner dialogues in loop, fixation on something and can't shift the attention away) is "bad", but to correct for it, the solution is not to forcefully get rid of it, but observe its natural change without judgment.

Being in the present moment in daily life makes me feel at peace. That what I am doing right now *IS* the whole world. It also helped me identify another habit (again, previously attributed to the lack of regular meditation practice): whenver I encountered a point at work when I had to debate what to do (a wording in a slide, or structure of the code), I tended to automatically grab my phone and check messages. This awareness gives me something to zoom in and practice in my work, and not just through more sitting meditation.

It also helped with a recurring problem that I could not solve even when I did the sitting meditation consistently, i.e. meals always felt like a boring waste of time, and should be accompanied by some mindless podcast listening, but then listening to podcast during meals was the slippery slope that led to less overall mindfulness. So far I was surprised to find being mindful at meals became easy. Perhaps because the more explicit emphasize on continuous awareness throughout the day, meal became less like an episode to get over with, but just another part of this mindful stream, with some extra novelty because I get to explore the taste modality.   

All the above is not to say don't do Goenka-style meditation. Without those long sitting training, I would not have been able to sustain my awareness long enough to do this type of daily practices. To use a machine learning analogy: the long sitting is like pre-training. It gives the mind the "muscle" to be able to focus and redirect after realizing the distraction. The continuous awareness during the day is like fine-tuning, to put the muscle to use in unfamiliar positions (borrowing my friend's analogy). It could be the muscle is strong enough, but unless it's fine-tuned in the new situation, it would not be able to release its potential.

# Simple practices
- Walking, standing, sitting, lying, what physical state are you in? What's your posture? What else are you doing right now?
- Are you present, or distracted?
- What is grabbing your attention?  
- Are you relaxed, or tense?
- If the mental state is undesirable, simply be aware without judgment. If there is judgment, be aware of that judgement. 
- Do you like, dislike, or neutral about what you are experiencing?
- When did your awareness of one thing starts? When does it disappear and shift to something else?
- When doing chores, eating, bathroom, pay attention to the present sensations and perceptions (including what you see, hear and smell!), as well as whether the mind is drifting away.
- The questions are meant to be a guide. You should not do a moment-to-moment mental Q & A.
- Pay special attention to the transition of actions
- Remember the goal is to appreciate the arising and passing away of elements of experiences.

# Some future ideas to expand upon
- Flow and upaya (skillful means)
- Awareness and wisdom
  

